Table Store Release 0.3.0 (#601)
apache/flink-web: _posts/2023-01-15-release-table-store-0.3.0.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Apache Flink Table Store 0.3.0 Release Announcement"
date: 2023-01-15T08:00:00.000Z
categories: news
authors:
- JingsongLi:
  name: "Jingsong Lee"

excerpt:  The Apache Flink Community is pleased to announce the release for Flink Table Store 0.3.0!

---

The Apache Flink community is pleased to announce the release of the
[Apache Flink Table Store](https://github.com/apache/flink-table-store) (0.3.0).

We highly recommend all users upgrade to Flink Table Store 0.3.0. 0.3.0 completed 150+ issues, which were completed by nearly 30 contributors.

Please check out the full [documentation]({{site.DOCS_BASE_URL}}flink-table-store-docs-release-0.3/) for detailed information and user guides.

<br/>

> Flink Table Store 0.3 completes many exciting features, Enhance its ability as a data lake and greatly
> improve the availability of stream pipeline. Some important features are described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flink Table Store 0.3 completes many exciting features, enhances its ability as a data lake storage and greatly
improves the availability of its stream pipeline. Some important features are described below.
```

As compactions are performed only by the dedicated job, writers can continuously write records without pausing and no conflicts will ever occur.

To skip compactions in writers, set `write-only` to `true`.

To run a dedicated job for compaction, follow these instructions.

Flink SQL currently does not support statements related to compactions, so we have to submit the compaction job through `flink run`.

Run the following command to submit a compaction job for the table.

```bash
<FLINK_HOME>/bin/flink run \
    -c org.apache.flink.table.store.connector.action.FlinkActions \
    /path/to/flink-table-store-dist-{{< version >}}.jar \
    compact \
    --warehouse <warehouse-path> \
    --database <database-name> \
    --table <table-name>
```

## Aggregation Table

Sometimes users only care about aggregated results. The
[aggregation merge engine]({{site.DOCS_BASE_URL}}flink-table-store-docs-release-0.3/docs/features/table-types/#aggregation)
aggregates each value field with the latest data one by one under the same primary key according to the aggregate function.

> Each field not part of the primary keys must be given an aggregate function, specified by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each field that is not part of the primary keys must be given an aggregate function, specified by the
```

`fields.<field-name>.aggregate-function` table property.

For example:

```
CREATE TABLE MyTable (
    product_id BIGINT,
    price DOUBLE,
    sales BIGINT,
    PRIMARY KEY (product_id) NOT ENFORCED
) WITH (
    'merge-engine' = 'aggregation',
    'fields.price.aggregate-function' = 'max',
    'fields.sales.aggregate-function' = 'sum'
);
```

## Schema Evolution

In version 0.2, the research and development of Schema Evolution has begun. In version 0.3, some of the capabilities
of Schema Evolution have been completed. You can use below operations in Spark-SQL (Flink SQL completes the following syntax in 1.17):

- Adding New Columns
- Renaming Column Name
- Dropping Columns

Flink Table Store ensures that the above operations are safe, and the old data will automatically adapt to
the new schema when it is read.

For example:

```
CREATE TABLE T (i INT, j INT);

INSERT INTO T (1, 1);

> ALTER TABLE T RENAME COLUMN i to a;

Reviewer 2: What do you think about adding `ADD COLUMN` in the example that users might be more interested in?

Author: Sounds good. I will add `ADD`

system table. Through audit_log table, you can get the `rowkind` column when you get the incremental data of the table.
You can use this column for filtering and other operations to complete the audit.

There are four values for `rowkind`:

- +I: Insertion operation.
- -U: Update operation with the previous content of the updated row.
- +U: Update operation with new content of the updated row.
- -D: Deletion operation.

For example:

```
SELECT * FROM MyTable$audit_log;

/*
+------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|     rowkind      |     column_0    |     column_1    |
+------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|        +I        |      ...        |      ...        |
+------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|        -U        |      ...        |      ...        |
+------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|        +U        |      ...        |      ...        |
+------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
3 rows in set
*/
```

## Ecosystem

Flink Table Store continues to strengthen its ecosystem and gradually gets through the reading and writing
of all engines. Each engine below 0.3 has been enhanced.

> - Spark write has been supported. But `INSERT OVERWRITE` and stream write are still supported.

Reviewer 2: Are `INSERT OVERWRITE` and stream write supported?

Author: NOT, I forgot add `NOT`...

- [S3]({{site.DOCS_BASE_URL}}flink-table-store-docs-release-0.3/docs/filesystems/s3/) and
  [OSS]({{site.DOCS_BASE_URL}}flink-table-store-docs-release-0.3/docs/filesystems/oss/)
  are supported by all computing engines.
- Hive 3.1 are supported.

> - Trino High versions (JDK 1.17) are supported.

Reviewer 2: Why is the "High" capitalized? Is "Trino High" refers to specific terminology? Would be better to clarify what more versions are supported.

Author: I will change this to JDK 1.17 versions

Author: Currently, the api has not changed, so we can support the new version
